# Getting and Cleaning Data course project

## Project files
The following files are provided by the repository:
* run_analysis.R - The script for converting the source data into a requested tidy dataset
* README.md - Description of the project and the script (this file)
* CodeBook.md - Description of the structure of the output dataset

In order for the scrip to run, the source data for the project has to be inzipped into the folder containing the script. The internal folder structure of the source data has to be preserved.

## Running the script
1. Start R or R-Studio
2. Make sure that the current folder contains the *run_analysis.R* script and the *UCI HAR Dataset* data folder (as described in the previous section)
3. Type *source("run_analysis.R")* to run the script
4. The resulting tidy data set *tidy_data.csv* will be saved to the current folder

## Overview of the script
As required by the project, the goal of the *run_analysis.R* script is to create a tidy dataset from the provided dataset of human activities recorded using the Samsung Galaxy S smartphones by the Smartlab - Non Linear Complex Systems Laboratory of the University of Genua.

### Description of the source data
Description of the source data is provided by the *UCI HAR Dataset\README.txt* file from the downloaded source data

### Project requirements for the script
1. Merge the training and the test sets to create one data set.
2. Extract only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement. 
3. Use descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set
4. Appropriately label the data set with descriptive variable names. 
5. Create a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject. 

### Brief description of the script's structure
In order to fulfil the project requirements, the script performs the following steps:

1. Read the Train and Test datasets
2. Merge the test data, subject and activities into a single table
3. Merge the training data, subject and activities into a single table
4. Merge all of the data into a single set
5. Load the text descriptions of features and activities
6. Replace the names of the dataset columns with the desctiptive names from the features file
7. Select the features to use in the tidy data set, i.e. only the variables with the mean() or std() in their names
8. Clean up the feature names:
  * remove the brackets
  * replace the dashes with underscores 
  * shorten the (probably erroneous) BodyBody to Body
9. Change the activities from the numeric to textual descriptions
10. Subset the original data with the required features to obtain the first tidy dataset 
11. Calculate the mean for every subject/activity/feature combination
12. Output the final tidy dataset

## Output Dataset
The structure of the tidy dataset (*"tidy_data.csv"*), generated by the *run_analysis.R* script is described in the companion file *CodeBook.md*
